We’re carried down by one of those hard shores,
while vapours from the brook rise, arching up,
to save both stream and margins from the ﬁre.
4 Flemings, enﬂamed – from Wissant on to Bruges –
in terror of the ﬂoods that blast towards them,
construct great screens to put the sea to ﬂight.
7 So, too, the Paduans, along the Brent,
attempt to shield their castles and estates,
before its source (Carinthia) is touched by heat.
10 Modelled on some original like these
(whatever master hand contrived them so)
these breaks were formed, though not that high or broad.
13 By now, we’d left the grove so far behind
that, even had I turned around to look,
I’d not have glimpsed the tract where it was found.
16 But here we came across a band of souls
who milled around the ditch and met our tread.
And each one peered at us – as people will
19 on evenings when the moon is new – their brows
towards us, wrinkled into squinting blades,
like those of some old tailor at his needle.
22* Eyed up and down so closely by this clan,
I now was recognized, as known, by one
who plucked my hem and cried: ‘How marvellous!’
25 And I – as he then stretched an arm towards me –
ﬁxed eyes so keenly through his ﬁre-baked look
that these singed features could not fend away28 my mind from knowing, truly, who he was.
And, reaching down a hand towards his face,
I answered him: ‘Brunetto, sir, are you here?’
31 ‘Do not, my dearest son,’ he said, ‘be vexed,
but let Brunetto Latino turn and walk
a while along with you. The troops can run!’
34 ‘I pray, sir, to the utmost, do. Or should
you wish,’ I said, ‘I’ll sit with you, so long
as this man here agrees. I go with him.’
37 ‘Dear boy,’ he said, ‘if any in this herd
should ever pause, he lies a hundred years
powerless to fan these searing ﬁres away.
40 And so move on. I’ll follow at your coat-tails
then catch up later with that entourage,
which, as it goes, bewails eternal loss.’
43 I did not dare climb down to quit the causeway
and walk with him on equal terms. But still,
as though in reverence, I kept my head bowed low.
46 ‘What chance or destiny,’ he then began,
‘leads you down here before your ﬁnal day?
And who is this that shows the way to you?’
49 ‘There, up above,’ I answered him, ‘where life
is halcyon, I lost myself – my path all blurred –
in some great deep before my years were full.
52 Only as dawn rose, yesterday, I turned
aside. Then he – as yet again I turned –
appeared, and guides me on the road back home.’
55 ‘If,’ so he answered, ‘you pursue your star,
then doubtless you will reach a glorious goal,
supposing, in the happy life, I knew you well.
58 And I myself (had not I died too soon),
seeing how kind the Heavens looked on you,
would willingly have helped you in your work.
61* But that malignant and ungrateful race
descending ab antico from Fiesole
(they still retain the taint of crag and hill)
64 will act, because you act so well, as bitter foes.
That much is logical: no luscious ﬁg
can rightly thrive where small, sour sorbus grows.
67 The world, since ancient times, has known they’re blind.
The tribe is grasping, envious and proud.
Keep yourself clean of habits of their kind.
70 Fortune for you reserves such great renown
that both these factions – Black and White – will seek to
set their teeth in you. Keep goats from grass!
73 Well may these cattle from Fiesole
make themselves straw but never touch the sprout
that springs (if any does within their dung)
76 to bring to life the sacred seed of Rome –
of those remaining when that ancient place
became the very home and nest of malice.’
79 ‘If all,’ I said to him, ‘that I might ask
were answered, and in full, then you would not
be exiled, as you are, from human nature.
82 Fixed in my thoughts, and working at my heart,
an image of you still endures – a dear, good father – as, in
the world, you were when hour by hour
85 you taught me how a man becomes eternal.
How great my gratitude must be, will show,
while I still live, in all my tongue will tell.
88 I write, as you recount it here, the story
of my future course, and keep your words with others.
A lady, if I come to her, will comment.
91 On this point only I would have you clear:
that I, so long as conscience does not chide,
am well prepared for all that Fortune wills.
94 In what you vouch, my ears hear nothing new.
Let Fortune, therefore, do as Fortune pleases –
whirl at her wheel like yokels at their hoe.’
97 My teacher, who had now turned right-about,
looked back at me and ﬁxed me with his eye.
‘Those listen well,’ he said, ‘who take good note.’100 So on I go, speaking with lawyer Brunetto.
I ask who his companions are, the great
and good, the eminent, and men of note.
103 ‘Of some,’ he said, ‘you’re right to want to know.
More laudable of others not to speak.
Our time would be too short for all that din.
106* But all of them, be sure, were men of learning,
authorities and dons of world renown,
besmirched, when living, with the self-same sin.
109 And so, among this dismal crowd, runs Priscian.
D’Accorso, too – the Prof. And if you yearn
to set your eyes on such-like mangy scabs,
112 you could. That bishop there! The Slave of Slaves
transferred him to Vicenza from the Arno.
He left his muscles, ill-distended, there.
115 I would say more. Yet further I may not
advance nor any longer talk with you.
I see new smoke there, rising from the sand.
118* I can’t consort with those who now draw near.
My Treasury – may that commend itself.
In that, I still live on. I ask no more.’
121* Around he swung. To me he seemed like one
who, in the ﬁelds around Verona, runs
for that ﬁne prize, a length of green festoon.
124 He seemed to be the one that wins, not loses.